[co2eq](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/index.html) - [IETF](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/ietf.html) - [MeetingsList](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/all_ietf_meetings.html) - [IETF72](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF72/ietf72.html) - [IETF73](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF73/ietf73.html) - [IETF74](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF74/ietf74.html) - [IETF75](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF75/ietf75.html) - [IETF76](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF76/ietf76.html) - [IETF77](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF77/ietf77.html) - [IETF78](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF78/ietf78.html) - [IETF79](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF79/ietf79.html) - [IETF80](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF80/ietf80.html) - [IETF81](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF81/ietf81.html) - [IETF82](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF82/ietf82.html) - [IETF83](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF83/ietf83.html) - [IETF84](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF84/ietf84.html) - [IETF85](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF85/ietf85.html) - [IETF86](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF86/ietf86.html) - [IETF87](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF87/ietf87.html) - [IETF88](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF88/ietf88.html) - [IETF89](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF89/ietf89.html) - [IETF90](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF90/ietf90.html) - [IETF91](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF91/ietf91.html) - [IETF92](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF92/ietf92.html) - [IETF93](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF93/ietf93.html) - [IETF94](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF94/ietf94.html) - [IETF95](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF95/ietf95.html) - [IETF96](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF96/ietf96.html) - [IETF97](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF97/ietf97.html) - [IETF98](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF98/ietf98.html) - [IETF99](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF99/ietf99.html) - [IETF100](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF100/ietf100.html) - [IETF101](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF101/ietf101.html) - [IETF102](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF102/ietf102.html) - [IETF103](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF103/ietf103.html) - [IETF104](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF104/ietf104.html) - [IETF105](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF105/ietf105.html) - [IETF106](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF106/ietf106.html) - [IETF107](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF107/ietf107.html) - [IETF108](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF108/ietf108.html) - [IETF109](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF109/ietf109.html) - [IETF110](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF110/ietf110.html) - [IETF111](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF111/ietf111.html) - [IETF112](https://mglt.github.io/co2eq/IETF/IETF112/ietf112.html)

# \(CO_2\) emission analysis for IETF meetings

{:toc}



This section details `CO2eq` outputs for the IETF meetings.
Section [4.1](#sec:ietf-co2) is primarily focused on interpreting the
environmental effect associated to handling on-site IETF meetings.
\(CO_2\) equivalent emissions are estimated and confronted to the
general perspective of the 2015 Paris agreement, the IPCC Working Group
I contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report AR6-WG1 (“Climate Change
2021: The Physical Science Basis, Working Group I contribution to the
Sixth Assessment Report AR6-WG1” 2021) as well as general envisioned
scenarios for aviation. Section [4.2](#sec:ietf-segments) estimates the
average number of flight segments per attendees and suggest that such
data may lead to further investigations as to limit exposure to virus
and limit the wide spread of a pandemic. At last
Section [4.3](#sec:ietf-others) depicts how \(CO_2\) may be used as a
more generic metric to measure IETF growth and analyse some trends at
the IETF such as diversity, transparency.

## \(CO_2\) Emission and Climate Change

This section estimates the amount of \(CO_2\) equivalent generated by
IETF meetings over time and compare the average of \(CO_2\) equivalent
emission per participant to the average \(CO_2\) emission per capita of
various countries. Then, different scenarios that apply to the general
aviation – each associated with a specific increase if the global
temperature – are applied to the IETF the evolution IETF meeting
frequency is compared to various scenarios for aviation resulting in
different increase if the global temperature.

### IETF attendee \(CO_2\) equivalent versus countries’ \(CO_2\) emission per capita

Figure [\[fig:presence\]](#fig:presence) depicts the evolution since
IETF 72 in Dublin of \(CO_2\) emission equivalent associated to air
traffic based on estimated – but real – flight itineraries. For each
flight the \(CO_2\) equivalent is estimated according to the ’myclimate’
and ’goclimate’ methodologies – both described and compared in
section [2](#sec:co2eq). Attendees are then clustered according to
their type of presence (’on-site’, ’remote’ or ’not-arrived’). While all
attendees are being assigned air flight, the effective \(CO_2\)
emissions of the meeting is represented by ’on-site’ participants only.

The effective amount of \(CO_2\) equivalent emission for IETF meetings
are quite stable between 2.5 and 3 Gg from IETF 72 in Dublin to IETF 93
in Prague. During this period, meetings in North America tends to
provide a slightly lower amount of emission – but not always and IETF 91
in Honolulu is an outlier with significant more emissions. From IETF 94
in Tokyo to IETF 106 in Vancouver, the amount of \(CO_2\) equivalent
emission presents a slight decreases with peaks associated to Asian
locations. IETF 107 Vancouver to IETF 112 in Madrid were entirely
virtual with no ’on-site’ participation.

The average effective \(CO_2\) equivalent emission from IETF 72 to
IETF 106 is estimated to be 2.5 Gg by myclimate and 3.2 Gg with
goclimate which corresponds respectively to an average of 2.2 and 2.7
tonnes per attendee.

Figure [2](#fig:percapita-map) [\[fig:percapita-chart\]](#fig:percapita-chart)
compares attending 1,2 and 3 IETF meeting a year to the annual \(CO_2\)
emission per capita provided by (Ritchie and Roser 2020) (Friedlingstein
et al. 2021a) (Friedlingstein et al. 2021b). The \(CO_2\) equivalent
emission associated to the attendance of 3 IETF meetings a year
corresponds to the emission per capita of Germany, Finland, Poland,
Belgium. These countries provide a higher amount of \(CO_2\) than the
average European countries mostly due to the use of coal to generate
their energy. The \(CO_2\) equivalent emission associated to the
attendance of 2 IETF meetings a year corresponds to the emission
corresponds to the per capita emission of European counties such as
Greece, Italy, UK. The \(CO_2\) equivalent emission associated to the
attendance of a single IETF per year corresponds to the emission per
capita of countries such as Venzuela, Mauritius.


![World Map
view<span label="fig:percapita-map"></span>](./fig/co-emissions-per-capita.pdf)

  

### Comparing IETF air flight traffic with envisioned scenario for aviation

(Klöwer et al. 2021) suggests aviation will contribute to contribute to
0.1 C of warming in 2050 if pre COVID-19 aviation growth would resume.
It further analyses 4 types of scenarios to foresee the future of
aviation with their respective responsibility and contribution to the
increase of temperature in 2050. These scenarios assume a post-COVID-19
recovery growth until 2024 followed by a post 2024 growth. The ’no
pandemic’ scenario considers no pandemic occurred with air travel
growing by 3% per year since the 1970. This scenario results in aviation
being responsible to raise temperature by 0.1 C. The ’back to normal
scenario’ considers a post COVID-19 growth of 16% per year and 3% per
year thereafter. This scenario results in aviation being responsible to
raise temperature by 0.09 C in 2050. More importantly it shows that the
brutal and forced decrease of flights during the COVID-19 has very
little long term impact. The ’zero long term growth’ assumes a post
COVID-19 recovery growth of 13% followed by a 0% growth. This scenario
is responsible to raise temperature by 0.06 . Finally the ’long term
decline’ assumes a post COVID-19 recovery growth of 10% followed by a
-2.5% growth, which ends up in air traffic level decreased by 50%
compared to 2019 – that is the level during the pandemic.

While these scenarios apply for the whole air traffic,
Figure [\[fig:aviation2021\]](#fig:aviation2021) apply these scenario
to the IETF meetings, assuming the same number of participants during
the meetings and considering for 2021 only a 45% decrease over 2019 – as
opposed to a 100% decrease that has been observed with IETF meetings
being fully virtual. Another adaptation is that unlike aviation growth
the number of meetings is not expected to be greater than 3 meetings per
year. The dash lines shows fractions of meeting which may be useful for
further studies considering hybrid meetings, that is when a significant
fraction of the attendees are ’remote’. However, this is left for
further analysis. Application of the air traffic scenarios to the IETF
related air traffic shows that scenario ignoring the needed effort to
fight climate change (’no pandemic’ and ’back to normal’) results in 3
meetings a year for the IETF while other scenarios (’zero long term
growth’ and ’long term decline’) result in respectively 2 or 1 IETF
meeting a year.

In 2015 nations agreed to limit the global warming well below 2 C.
Current forecast based on Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC)
established that we are heading toward 2.4 C. The IPCC Working Group I
contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report AR6-WG1 (“Climate Change
2021: The Physical Science Basis, Working Group I contribution to the
Sixth Assessment Report AR6-WG1” 2021) insisted that every fraction of a
degree of increase is important and that major effort needs to be done
to reach the achievable 1.5 C. In such context, it seems unappropriated
to maintain a rate of 3 IETF meeting a year by which participants
produce as much emission as European countries using coal to generate
their energy. A more sustainable approach is needed and the target to
reduce by 45% emission in the Paris agreement in 2015 as well as a
sustainable scenario for aviation suggest to limit IETF meetings to 1
IETF meeting a year as well as huge effort to improve the remote
participation experience.

## Limiting Air Flights Connections to Limit Virus Exposure

While the COVID-19 pandemic situation took us by surprise, it is likely
that pandemic frequency increases and that more severe pandemics are to
come - especially as the root cause of pandemic is due to the
anthropogenic destruction of biodiversity (Daszak et al. 2020).

While work remains to be done to evaluate the exact role airports are
play in to the spreading of a pandemic, it remains plausible that
limiting the number of transit airports reduces the risk of infection
and consequently the wide spread of the pandemic.
Figure [\[fig:segments\]](#fig:segments) depicts for each IETF the
number of flight segments for each attendee – including ’on-site’,
’remote’ and ’not-arrived’ — and
Table [\[tab:segments\]](#tab:segments) orders the IETF meetings
according to the average number of segments per attendee. It appears
that places like Tokyo, Los Angeles and Bejin are the destinations that
minimize flight connections.

Of course, such findings require additional analysis to refine, for
example, the role of airports into the widespread of a pandemic,
refining the total number of connections to the number of connections in
international airports, the duration of the connection, the time to
retrieve luggage among other things. It should also consider that
departure location has been estimated as the capital of the attendee’s
country which may for large countries introduce a bias.

| IETF Meeting         | City          | Country | Connections   |
| :------------------- | :------------ | :------ | :------------ |
| 77                   | Los Angeles   | US      | 2.4           |
| 94                   | Tokyo         | JP      | 2.8           |
| 79                   | Beijing       | CN      | 2.8           |
| 98                   | Chicago       | US      | 3.2           |
| 83                   | Paris         | FR      | 3.4           |
| 89, 101              | London        | GB      | 3.5           |
| 92                   | Dallas/Fort W | US      | 3.5           |
| 74                   | San Francisco | US      | 3.5           |
| 86                   | Orlando       | US      | 3.5           |
| 85                   | Atlanta       | US      | 3.6           |
| 78                   | Brussels      | BE      | 3.6           |
| 76                   | Osaka         | JP      | 3.6           |
| 111                  | San Francisco | US      | 3.7           |
| 97                   | Seoul         | KR      | 3.8           |
| 96, 87               | Berlin        | DE      | 3.9           |
| 75                   | Stockholm     | SE      | 3.9           |
| 72                   | Dublin        | IE      | 4             |
| 90                   | Toronto       | CA      | 4.0           |
| 108, 112             | Madrid        | ES      | 4.1           |
| 103, 109             | Bangkok       | TH      | 4.1, 4.3      |
| 81, 102, 105         | Montreal      | CA      | 4.1           |
| 100, 106             | Singapore     | SG      | 4.2, 4.3      |
| 95                   | Buenos Aires  | AR      | 4.3           |
| 82                   | Taipei        | TW      | 4.3           |
| 73                   | Minneapolis   | US      | 4.4           |
| 84, 88, 107          | Vancouver     | CA      | 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 |
| 91                   | Honolulu      | US      | 4.5           |
| 80, 93, 99, 104, 110 | Prague        | CZ      | 4.5, 4.6, 4.7 |

Ordered average flight connections per attend for each IETF meetings
<span label="tab:segments"></span>

## Measuring Growth, Diversity and Transparency

\(CO_2\) equivalent emissions of an attendee can be seen as a metric
that measures participation by attribution a cost to a given
participation. The cost in question is obviously an environmental cost,
but it also combines travel distance, travel expenses (air flight and
hotel) as well as other costs such as time commitment to attend the IETF
meeting. Overall the sum of the attendee costs may reflect the value of
the meeting and by extension the value associated by a certain type of
participation. More precisely, the global costs associated to the
participants could reflect the worth of an IETF meeting, and the costs
associated to ’on-site’ participation (respectively ’remote’,
’not-arrived’) reflects the worth – and share – associated to each
type of participation. The \(CO_2\) metric is very similar to the number
of attendee number metric, however, the attendee number reflects an
attendee decision while the cost estimation ponders attendee with the
cost. More specifically, it provides more weight to distant
participants, for which the participation has a higher cost. It may also
provides a zero cost to attendee of the country when the IETF meeting is
hosted in the country’s capital. Overall this seems to lower attendees’
participation due to their local presence to an IETF meeting. Note that
we are not trying to defend such the \(CO_2\) metric as opposed to the
number of participant. Instead we are considering this metric as
possibly providing a new angle that may be interesting.

Figure [\[fig:presence\]](#fig:presence) as well as
Figure [\[fig:presence-person\]](#fig:presence-person) respectively
depict the \(CO_2\) emission and the number of attendees per type of
meeting participation. All three figures tend to show a similar trend
that is: ’on-site’ attendance is slowly declining and that ’remote’
participation is growing. However such trends are more visible using the
\(CO_2\) metric as opposed to the number of attendee metric. Asian and
South American (Buenos Aires) locations present peaks with the \(CO_2\)
metric for both ’on-site’ and ’remote’ attendees while such peaks are
less evident with the number of attendees metric. One possible way to
interpret these peaks is that attendees are heavily located in North
America and Europe.

Figure [\[fig:country\]](#fig:country) clusters \(CO_2\) emissions as
well as the number of attendees per countries. Both metrics show a large
representation from the US compared to the other countries. On the other
hand, Asia is well represented with China, Japan and Korea being the
second, third and tenth most represented countries and overall the Asian
region seems to be represented similarly to Europe. As countries present
a huge difference in term of population a representation in term of
region might be useful. However, from the country representation, it can
be inferred that the African, the Middle East and the South American
regions are under-represented. Figure [\[fig:country\]](#fig:country)
also shows that the overwhelming majority of the attendees are mostly
representing 15 countries, which seems to indicate a reaching out
strategies may not be limited to regions, but may consider a finer
granularity such as countries.

  

  

Figure [\[fig:organization\]](#fig:organization) clusters the costs and
attendee numbers per organizations. The positive aspect is that the most
represented organizations do represent less than 50% of the global
attendance. On the other hand, further investigation are needed to
understand the full ecosystem, that is whether organizations labeled as
’Others’ are independent organizations as opposed as working for other
declared organizations. Similarly, the most represented organization is
the one labeled ’Not Provided’ which indicates the field organization
has not been filled by the attendee. Further investigations are also
needed here to clarify the reasons this field is omitted.

  

  

# Conclusions

This paper presents `CO2eq` that estimate the \(CO_2\) equivalent
emission generated by international meetings. Currently `CO2eq-v0.0.1`
limits its evaluation to air traffic emission – which is known to be the
largest source of emission for such meetings. `CO2eq-v0.0.1` is an early
version and many directions to make the tool evolve have been
considered.

IETF conferences have been the first case to be tested by `CO2eq`. The
IPCC Working Group I contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report AR6-WG1
urged every sectors to reduce its \(CO_2\) emissions to keep the target
of 1.5 C. While we are currently on track to a 2.4 C increase of
temperature, the 1.5 C remains possible to reach. `CO2eq` helps to
estimate the IETF contribution and what effort could be considered to
remain a responsible community.

The amount of \(CO_2\) emission per attendee for 3 ’on-site’ IETF
meeting per year corresponds to the average \(CO_2\) per capita emitted
by European countries producing energy based on coal such as Germany or
Poland. The amount for a 2 meeting attendance corresponds to the average
\(CO_2\) per capita emitted by European countries such as UK, Greece or
Italy, and the attendance to a single IETF meeting per year corresponds
to the \(CO_2\) per capita of countries like Venezuela or Mauritius. It
is unsure there are substantial justifications for the IETF to
contribute to that extend to the world wide \(CO_2\) emissions and the
limiting IETF ’on-site’ meeting to at most 1 per year should be
considered.

Such limit to 1 meeting per year is also met when considering the Paris
agreement that required a 45% decrease, as well as a more recent studies
evaluating the evolution of aviation in the next coming years. More
specifically, 3 IETF meeting a year match evolution to the air traffic
that would result in aviation being responsible to increase the
temperature between 0.09 C and 0.1 C. 2 IETF (resp. 1 IETF) meetings a
year match scenario where aviation would be responsible to increase the
temperature of 0.06 C (resp. 0.04 C).

The IETF has already demonstrated that remote meetings is a feasible.
The main drawback that has been raised regarding ’remote’ meeting is
that hallway discussions are harder to happen. This is correct with the
current IETF setting where most people attend the meeting, and then
disconnect themselves. The IETF has set a dedicated place for hallway
discussion – namely Gather – but the current setting requires a specific
connection to such place which is definitely a different concept than a
hallway where attendees have to go through to attend their sessions.
Time zone is also an issue, and the IETF leadership has held many
(successful) experiments in term of agenda scheduling. Moving an
organization from entirely ’on-site’ to entirely ’remote’ will take some
time and while the feasibility is not anymore to prove, some work remain
to improve the remote experience. It also appears that ’remote’
participation is a key factor to make the IETF grow and as such seems a
promising path.

That experimentation of ’remote’ meeting – while entirely feasible –
came so late may highlight that more effort on corporate sustainability
to ensure IETF operates in ways that, at a minimum, meet fundamental
responsibilities. For example, the United Nations Global
Compact (“United Nations Global Compact” 2021) set 10 principles to
address corporate sustainability in a broad sense, and only principles
7-9 are related to the environment. Adherence to such program ensures
these principles are part of the IETF strategy and culture with the
publication of Communication on Progress. More specifically related to
\(CO_2\) emissions, the IETF may also consider adhering to the caring
for climate initiative (“"CARING FOR CLIMATE: THE BUSINESS LEADERSHIP
PLATFORM” A Statement by the Business Leaders of the Caring for Climate
Initiative” 2021) led by the Global Compact, UN Environment Program
(UNEP) and the secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC).


<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-airportandcitysearch">

“Amadeus for Developpers: Airport & City Search.” 2019.
<https://developers.amadeus.com/self-service/category/air/api-doc/airport-and-city-search>.

</div>

<div id="ref-flightsearchoffer">

“Amadeus for Developpers: Flight Offers Search.” 2019.
<https://developers.amadeus.com/self-service/category/air/api-doc/flight-offers-search>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ghgp">

Barrow, Martin, Benedict Buckley, Tom Caldicott, Tom Cumberlege, John
Hsu, Scott Kaufman, Kevin Ramm, et al. 2013. “Technical Guidance for
Calculating Scope 3 Emissions.” World Resources Institute with
GreenHouse Gas Protocol (GHG) Protocol; Carbon Trust.
<https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/Scope3_Calculation_Guidance_0.pdf>.

</div>

<div id="ref-10.1145/3401335.3401711">

Bergmark, Pernilla, Vlad C. Coroamă, Mattias Höjer, and Craig Donovan.
2020. “A Methodology for Assessing the Environmental Effects Induced by
Ict Services: Part Ii: Multiple Services and Companies.” In *Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Ict for Sustainability*, 46–55.
ICT4S2020. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
<https://doi.org/10.1145/3401335.3401711>.

</div>

<div id="ref-c4c">

“"CARING FOR CLIMATE: THE BUSINESS LEADERSHIP PLATFORM” A Statement by
the Business Leaders of the Caring for Climate Initiative.” 2021.
<https://d306pr3pise04h.cloudfront.net/docs/publications%2FC4C_Statement.pdf>.

</div>

<div id="ref-countryinfo">

Chandro, Porimol, Kasper Sørensen, Muhammad Arslan, and Jannik J. 2021.
“CountryInfo: A python module for returning data about countries, ISO
info and states/provinces within them.”
<https://pypi.org/project/countryinfo/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ar6-wg1">

“Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis, Working Group I
contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report AR6-WG1.” 2021. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
<https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-i/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-eia">

“COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS ENERGY CONSUMPTION SURVEY (CBECS).” 2021. US
Energy Information Administration (EIA).
<https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-10.1145/3401335.3401716">

Coroamă, Vlad C., Pernilla Bergmark, Mattias Höjer, and Jens Malmodin.
2020. “A Methodology for Assessing the Environmental Effects Induced by
Ict Services: Part I: Single Services.” In *Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Ict for Sustainability*, 36–45. ICT4S2020.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
<https://doi.org/10.1145/3401335.3401716>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ipbes-2020">

Daszak, P., C. G. Amuasi J.and das Neves, D. Hayman, T. Kuiken, B.
Roche, C. Zambrana-Torrelio, P. Buss, et al. 2020. “IPBES WORKSHOP ON
BIODIVERSITY AND PANDEMICS.” United Nations Educational, Scientific;
Cultural Organization (UNESCO); Intergovernmental Science-Policy
Platform on Biodiversity; Ecosystem Services (IPBES).
<https://ipbes.net/sites/default/files/2020-12/IPBES%20Workshop%20on%20Biodiversity%20and%20Pandemics%20Report_0.pdf>.

</div>

<div id="ref-eri-sustainability">

“Ericsson Sustainability research.” 2021. Ericsson.
<https://www.ericsson.com/en/about-us/sustainability-and-corporate-responsibility/sustainability-metrics/sustainability-research>.

</div>

<div id="ref-gcp-2021">

Friedlingstein, P., M. W. Jones, M. O’Sullivan, R. M. Andrew, D. C. E.
Bakker, J. Hauck, C. Le Quéré, et al. 2021a. “Data supplement to the
Global Carbon Budget 2021.” Integrated Carbon Observation System (ICOS).
<https://doi.org/10.18160/gcp-2021>.

</div>

<div id="ref-essd-2021-386">

———. 2021b. “Global Carbon Budget 2021.” *Earth System Science Data
Discussions* 2021: 1–191. <https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-2021-386>.

</div>

<div id="ref-goclimate">

“GO. Climate Neutral: Calculations in the GoClimateNeutral Flight
Footprint API.” 2019. GO Climate Neutral.
<https://api.goclimateneutral.org/docs>.

</div>

<div id="ref-epa">

“Greenhouse Gas Inventory Guidance Indirect Emissions from Events and
Conferences).” 2018. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
<https://www.epa.gov/climateleadership>.

</div>

<div id="ref-cop26">

Guterres, António. 2021. “Secretary-General’s Statement on the
Conclusion of the UN Climate Change Conference COP26.” United Nations
Climate Change.
<https://unfccc.int/news/secretary-general-s-statement-on-the-conclusion-of-the-un-climate-change-conference-cop26>.

</div>

<div id="ref-iso-3166">

Hyojun, Kang. 2021. “ISO 3361-1 Country code package for Python.”
<https://pypi.org/project/iso-3166-1/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-icao">

“ICAO Carbon Emissions Calculator Methodology.” 2018. International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

</div>

<div id="ref-icaodata">

“ICAO DATA+.” 2021. International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
<https://data.icao.int/newDataPlus/Tools>.

</div>

<div id="ref-icaoeco">

“ICAO Economic Development: Air Transport Monitor.” 2021. International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
<https://www.icao.int/sustainability/Pages/Air-Traffic-Monitor.aspx>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ietf">

“Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).” n.d. <https://www.ietf.org>.

</div>

<div id="ref-rfi">

Jungbluth, Niels, and Christoph Meili. 2019. “Recommendations for
calculation of the global warming potential of aviation including the
radiative forcing index.” The International Journal of Life Cycle
Assessment.
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/329051755_Recommendations_for_calculation_of_the_global_warming_potential_of_aviation_including_the_radiative_forcing_index>.

</div>

<div id="ref-aviation-2021">

Klöwer, M, M R Allen, D S Lee, S R Proud, L Gallagher, and A Skowron.
2021. “Quantifying Aviation’s Contribution to Global Warming” 16 (10):
104027. <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac286e>.

</div>

<div id="ref-lc">

Messmer, Annika, and Rolf Frischknecht. 2016. “Life Cycle Inventories of
Air Transport Services.” treeze fair life cycle thinking.
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312196655_LCA_of_air_transport_services/link/5875d43608ae6eb871ca6cb7/download>.

</div>

<div id="ref-co2eq">

Migault, Daniel. 2021. “Compute \(CO_2\) equivalent emissions.”
<https://github.com/mglt/co2eq>.

</div>

<div id="ref-owid-aviation">

Ritchie, Hannah. 2020. “Climate change and flying: what share of global
\(CO_2\) emissions come from aviation?” October.
<https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions-from-aviation>.

</div>

<div id="ref-owidco2andothergreenhousegasemissions">

Ritchie, Hannah, and Max Roser. 2020. *Our World in Data*.
<https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-other-greenhouse-gas-emissions>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ecoinvent">

Spielmann, Michael, Christian Bauer, Roberto Dones, Paul Scherrer, and
Matthias Tuchschmid. 2007. “Transport Services.” Ecoinvent Center.
<https://db.ecoinvent.org/reports/14_Transport.pdf>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ghgp-online">

“The GHG Emissions Calculation Tool.” 2021. GreenHouse Gas Protoco (GHG
Protocol)l. <https://ghgprotocol.org/ghg-emissions-calculation-tool>.

</div>

<div id="ref-myclimate">

“The myclimate Flight Emission Calculator.” 2019. Foundation myclimate.
[www.myclimate.org](www.myclimate.org).

</div>

<div id="ref-cprofiler">

“The Python Profilers.” 2019.
<https://docs.python.org/3/library/profile.html>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ungc">

“United Nations Global Compact.” 2021.
<https://www.unglobalcompact.org/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-climateclock">

Usher, David, and Damon Matthews. 2021. “The climate Clock.” Concordia
University. <https://climateclock.net/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-eeaaviation3">

Winther, Morten, Kristin Rypdal, Lene Sørensen, Manfred Kalivoda, Monica
Bukovnik, Niels Kilde, Riccardo De Lauretis, et al. 2019a. “1.A.3.a
Aviation 1 Master emissions calculator 2019.” EEA Report No 13/2019.
European Environment Agency (EEA) / European Monitoring; Evaluation
Programme (EMEP). <https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/WFM2I9GHX8>.

</div>

<div id="ref-eeaaviation2">

———. 2019b. “1.A.3.a Aviation 2 LTO emissions calculator 2019.” EEA
Report No 13/2019. European Environment Agency (EEA) / European
Monitoring; Evaluation Programme (EMEP).
<https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/VO7PBDEIY8>.

</div>

<div id="ref-eeaaviation1">

———. 2019c. “EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019:
Aviation.” EEA Report No 13/2019. European Environment Agency (EEA) /
European Monitoring; Evaluation Programme (EMEP).
<https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/SEB4A9UJYD>.

</div>

</div>

  

